| [home page](https://joannajkim.github.io/joanna-kim-portfolio/) | [critique by design](https://joannajkim.github.io/joanna-kim-portfolio/critique-by-design) | [final project I](https://joannajkim.github.io/joanna-kim-portfolio/final-project-part-one) | [final project II](https://joannajkim.github.io/joanna-kim-portfolio/final-project-part-two) | [final project III](https://joannajkim.github.io/joanna-kim-portfolio/final-project-part-three) | 

# The final data story

[Shorthand Story: Lasting Effects of Student Loan Debt](https://carnegiemellon.shorthandstories.com/joanna-kim-lasting-effects-of-student-loan-debt/index.html)

# Changes made since Part II/Final Design Decisions

Since the completion of Part II, I have made many changes, most of them being design focused. One change was in response to the comments I received during my interviews related to cleaning up the design choices and how the inconsistent use of colors were distracting. My interviewees also mentioned that they would have liked clearer headers to separate each section of my project (like "chapters" in a book as someone had mentioned) because the inconsistent text sizes made it difficult to clearly navigate the storyline for the viewer and made it unclear what the main idea of each section was. The color scheme was a bit unorganized in my Part II because I wanted to use all three colors of the American Flag but due to this, it seemed like there was no rhyme or reason to the organization. I realized, after my interviews, that while the color choices themselves can make sense in the context (American flag colors for U.S. student loan debt and my audience: U.S. higher education institutions), if they are used sporatically (as I did for Part II), it can hinder the message of my story. Therefore, to address these comments, I decided to use colors more logically and sparingly. For example, I decided to remove the use of red for text because I realized it created too much eye travel especially when used in conjunction with blue text and was often a harder color to read against white background. Therefore, I decided to mainly use blue text, with some white text, and used the red as more of an accent color sparingly. 

I also decided to create clearer distinctions between headers of each section by bolding them and/orseparating them on their own page in shorthand and the use of hierarchy of text. I think this was an improvement from Part II because it allows clearer portrayal of information without creating unncessary eye travel. I also played around with the background colors because some of the text was hard to read against the background images or darker color backgrounds and I think this also improved readibility. I learned that even if I want to use many different colors, simplicity is often better. I decided to use green for the colors of the data visualizations because I thought it would be an appropriate color for the subject matter and follows conventions that green is linked to U.S. currency. For the mental health visualization, I decided to use blue because I felt that the green was too apathetic and blue is often associated with mental health and calmness, even if the data isn't necessarily positive, the blue felt like an appropriate color to represent the data. For the data visualizations related to showing disparities between genders, after consideration of whether to use green to follow the rest of the data visualizations, it felt more appropriate to use the conventional colors of blue and pink. Finally, another design change I made was related to contrast between text and background. In Part II, a lot of my text was hard to read against the background, especially opaque backgrounds, so I made changes to ensure enough contrast for readibility across the design. 

Another change I made in response to the comments I received during my interviews was clarifying and narrowing down my audience. For Part I, I had 4 audiences: students, higher education insitutions, policymakers, and employers. I decided to narrow down my audience to higher education institutions because higher education institutions are more directly involved and play a large part in the system that leads to student loan debt. 

Another change I made in response to the comments I received during my interviews was narrowing down text, particuraly text that was a repeat of what the data visualizations already conveyed. While I still kept much of the text size, there were places where I did shorten the text or made it more concise. In Part II some of my text was a repeat of what was already clearly explained in the title of my data visualizations, so I deleted that text and let the visualizations speak for themselves. 

I also added two more data visualizations to the beginning since Part II, which are the Average Debt Per Student in the United States and the Average Debt Per State in the United States. I felt that these visualizations were important and interesting to add in order to personalize even further the debt that each student has and also to showcase the specific student loan debt numbers instead of providing just the general total U.S. student loan debt as I did before.

Finally, another change I made was reordering certain slides because I think the slides were a bit unorganized in Part II and did not tell a cohesive story that flowed appropriately. I made more distinguishable sections in order to create more connected sections and to split up the density of the content. 

One thing that stood out to me that I learned working through this whole process was the importance of the critique by design process and gathering feedback from others. I would not have noticed what my interviewees had noticed so it is important to receive outside perspectives when creating projects. Also, iterations are very important in the creation of anything, especially when designing data visualizations and seeing the improvement from my very first sketches is a testament to the importance of gathering feedback and continued iterations. 

## The audience

The audiences I identified for my final data story are higher education insitutions. I realized, after my interviews, that with the story I was telling about the lasting negative effects of student loan debt, while student loan debt involves students, the message of my story doesn't really align nor was truly meant for students. I wanted to inspire positive change in the student loan debt crisis and while students can help mitigate their own debts, there are larger systems at play rather than each individual student. I also didn't feel like employers were the main target audience, even though they too can play a part in helping to solve the student loan debt crisis, they are not the main audience for this specific story. Therefore, I decided to narrow my audience to higher education institutions. At first, I wanted to narrow down my audience to higher education institutions and policmakers, but after much consideration and feedback from my Professor and TA, I realized that narrowing down the audience can help streamline and focus in on my story. Therefore, I think the most appropriate audience for the message of my story of the negative long term effects of student loan debt, would be higher education institutions since they would be able to see that negative impacts of student loan debt on their graduated students and are also capable of creating the impactful and widespread change through the cost of attendance. From this, I learned that trying to communicate to too many different audiences can make it harder to tailor the message to all of these different groups so it is often better to narrow down target audiences to ensure that your message is specific to them. 

With this new narrowed down audience in mind, to add more personal connection to the students for the audience and to also break up some of the text, I added more images of students. I also added the two new data visualizations (Average Debt Per Student in the United States and the Average Debt Per State in the United States) in response to this new audience because each state has different higher education institutions within, so I think highlighting each datapoint for each specific state and the average student loan debt creates a further personal connection between higher education insitutions and each student.

## References
References for Part III are all in Shorthand at the end of the story under "Bibliography".

# Final thoughts
Overall, I think the entire project was fun to create. It required a lot of detailed work and iterations through the critique by design process that I was not familiar with before, but I feel that I have learned a lot and it has made me realize how important it is to not only get feedback from others, but the importance of building each element of a project step-by-step. I think having the project split into three parts really allowed me the opportunity to take time to gather and clarify my ideas and plan out everything without rushing through anything, which is usually what I would have done for any other project. I would love to apply the critique by design process into my future career and projects because it has proven, in this class, to be extremely helpful. 


